had to pay for the subsidiary forces that the Company was supposed to maintain for the purpose of this protection. If the Indian rulers failed to make the payment, then part of their territory was taken away as penalty. For example, when Richard Wellesley was Governor - General 1798-1805 , the Nawab of Awadh was forced to give over half of his territory to the Company in 1801, as he failed to pay for the subsidiary forces . Hyderabad was also forced to cede territories on similar grounds. 



Figure 6 Nawab Shujauddaulah of Awadh, with his sons and the British Resident, painted by Tilly Kettle oil, 1772  

The treaties that followed the Battle of Buxar forced Nawab Shujauddaulah to give up much of his authority. Here, however, he poses in regal splendour, towering over the Resident. 

Injunction Instruction 

Subservience  Submissiveness 









Tipu Sultan The Tiger of Mysore  The Company resorted to direct military confrontation when it saw a threat to its political or economic interests. This can be illustrated with the case of the southern Indian state of Mysore. 

Mysore had grown in strength under the leadership of powerful rulers like Haidar Ali ruled from 1761 to 1782 and his famous son Tipu Sultan ruled from 1782 to 1799 . Mysore controlled the profitable trade of the Malabar coast where the Company purchased pepper and cardamom. In 1785 Tipu Sultan stopped the export of sandalwood, pepper and cardamom through the ports of his kingdom, and disallowed local merchants from trading with the Company. He also established a close 

Figure 7 Tipu Sultan 



OUR PASTS III 

 Figure 8 Cornwallis receiving the sons of Tipu Sultan as hostages, painted by Daniel Orme, 1793 

The Company forces were defeated by Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan in several battles. But in 1792, attacked by the combined forces of the Marathas, the Nizam of Hyderabad and the Company, Tipu was forced to sign a treaty with the British by which two of his sons were taken away as hostages. British painters always liked painting scenes that showed the triumph of British power. 





relationship with the French in India, and modernised his army with their help. 

The British were furious. They saw Haidar and Tipu as ambitious, arrogant and dangerous rulers who had to be controlled and crushed. Four wars were fought with Mysore 1767- 69, 1780-84, 1790-92 and 1799 . Only in the last the Battle of Seringapatam did the Company ultimately win a victory. Tipu Sultan was killed defending his capital Seringapatam, Mysore was placed under the former ruling dynasty of the Wodeyars and a subsidiary alliance was imposed on the state. 

Figure 9 T ipu s toy tiger 

This is the picture of a big mechanical toy that Tipu possessed. You can see a tiger mauling a European soldier. When its handle was turned the toy tiger roared and the soldier shrieked. This toy- tiger is now kept in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. The British took it away when Tipu Sultan died defending his capital Seringapatam on 4 May 1799. 

FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 



