Abraham Lincoln (February 12, 1809 - April 15, 1865) was an American statesman and lawyer who served as the 16th President of the United States from March 1861 until his assassination in Apr
il 1865.
, abolished slavery, strengthened the federal government, and modernized the economy.
Largely self-educated, he became a lawyer in Illinois, a Whig Party leader, and was elected to
Elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1846, Lincoln promoted rapid modernization of the economy
After a single term, he returned to Illinois and resumed his successful law practice.
As part of the 1858 campaign for US Senator from Illinois, Lincoln took part in a series of highly publicized debates with hi
In 1860, Lincoln secured the Republican Party presidentia
l nomination as a moderate from a swing state, though most delegates originally favored other candidates.
pt the North and was elected president in 1860.
Though there were attempts to bridge the differences between North and South, ultimately Lincoln's victory prompted seven southern slave states to secede from the United States and form the
Troops refused to leave Fort Sumter, a fort located in Charleston, South Carolina, after the succession of the Southe
The resulting Confederate attack on Fort Sumter inspired the North to rally behind the Union.
ical Republicans, who demanded harsher treatment of the South, War Democrats, who rallied a large faction of former opponents into his camp, anti-war Democrats (called Copperheads), who desp
Lincoln fought back by pitting his opponents against each other, by carefully planned political patronage, and by a
[4] His Gettysburg Address became an iconic endorsement of nationalism, republicanism, equal rights, liberty, and democracy.
Lincoln closely supervised the war
He made major decisions on Union war strategy, including a naval blockade that shut dow
As the war progressed, his complex moves toward ending slavery included the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863; Lincoln used the U.S. Army to protect escaped slaves, enco
uraged the border states to outlaw slavery, and pushed through Congress the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which permanently outlawed slavery.
An astute politician deeply involved with power issues in each state, Lincoln reached out to the War Democrats and managed his own re-election campaign in the 1864 presidential election.
icipating the war's conclusion, Lincoln pushed a moderate view of Reconstruction, seeking to reunite the nation speedily through a policy of generous reconciliation in the face of lingering
On April 14, 1865, five days after the surrender of Confederate general Robert E. Lee, Lincoln was shot by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth and died the nex
Lincoln has been consistently ranked both by scholars[5] and the public[6] as among the greatest U.S. presidents.
